Might as
well get the lights back on. Follow. You know, I've
been looking at my watch all the time. I have to keep
track of the length of the tape. It's got a ring, but
it doesn't do so. Did you get viewing before you
died? No, I did not. And, you know, his brother
taught at A.D. He's here down the hall. He is. John?
No, his brother, who was a historian. I didn't
know about that. First series of questions, this
will follow really a biographical filing
chronologically in format. First series of
questions concern how you developed an interest
in oceanography and what led you to oceanography.
And so, would you briefly discuss your career as it
leads up to your meeting with Francis Shepherd?
That's pretty easy. I lived in Dallas and Fort
Worth, and it was convenient for the first couple
years to go to North Texas Agricultural College. I
was pretty good in math in high school, so I thought
I'd be an electrical engineer. And so I took the
first two years of electrical engineering
courses, and that's all I was taught at NTAC. And I
had time for a couple of electives, so I took
historical geology and physical geology from one
of the math instructors. His name was Shirley
Lynch, who later went to A&M. And I got quite a bit
interested in the geology, so I thought I'd then
combine the electrical engineering and the
geology. The only way I could think of combining it
was as mining engineering. So I went to University
of Illinois. on Lynch's recommendation. And, of
course, I wasn't funded or anything. And so
normally people who didn't have much money in
those days would get a summer job to make enough
money to pay tuition, books, and so forth, and get
other jobs when they went there. Several of us had
worked at the World's Fairs, say, in Chicago in
1934 and in San Diego in 19... 35, mainly because
World Fairs were places of new employment, and
therefore they're a new job. So we earned enough
money then to work to go to school the next year. So
anyway, a couple of us worked in San Diego, then
rode the freights and the trike and so forth to
Urbana, Illinois. And the first job that's
necessary is to get one that provides food, and
waiting tables, and busing, and so forth. The next
point is to get a job that provides money. And I had
done drafting before, so I got a job with Francis
Shepherd at that time, drafting, making maps. And
then, of course, I took mining engineering
courses and more geology. And it became evident
after I'd been down a couple coal mines that
geology was more interesting, straight geology.
So I switched to straight geology for the
bachelor's degree. And then about that time,
Shepard and I started on a big map of California.
And I spent the summer of 1936 in Washington. at the
coast within the coast genetic survey making
large-scale maps that later had to be reduced to a
common scale and that increased the interest of
course in oceanography and then shepherd had a
$10,000 grant that provided for a year of ship time
at Scripps and other things. And so alternate
semesters, we'd go from University of Illinois to
Scripps. And so then that provided—at that time,
then I decided to go to oceanography all the way to
marine geology. Those trips provided an
opportunity for master's degrees and doctor's
degrees for both Robert Dietz and me. So we were in
the mainstream then of them.
This is a check of tape recorder number two. The
break in the tape is due to a switch in the tape
recorder after one seemingly malfunctioned. Can
we start over again? No, it's all right. It can be
made out. It's not any problem with that, with what
we've done. I just don't want to take a chance on it
getting progressively worse as we go through. It
seems to be getting worse, yeah.
The spindle was driving at too rapid a rate of
speed, but this one seems to be moving more slowly.
What sort of man was Francis Shepard? What was he
like when you met him, and what did he do to inspire
you to enter oceanography? Well, he was a The
shepherd, when I first met him, was probably 38 or
thereabouts, at least as I recall. And he was very
energetic. He was motivated by research. And I'd
never met somebody who had been motivated by
research before, because at North Texas
Agricultural College, the people were mainly
interested in teaching and not research. And it's
just a little bit of a different world, different
interests, and so forth. The amount of effort that
one will spend to find out, to learn something, was
surprising to me. Though I had tried something
like that once before, just and so forth. And I was
much impressed by it. devotion to marine geology
that he used, and the interest of other people in
what he was doing. What about Robert Dietz? He and I
were students at the same level, and Dietz
was a very good fundamental thinker, interested
in the basics of things. I was sort of more
interested in the a slightly different approach,
more in seeing what the distribution of things
were and making deductions from that. We made a
good team. We worked together for three or four
years, together aboard the ship and also as
roommates in Illinois. We actually stayed at the
Shepherd's Attic, in the Shepherd's Attic, by the
way, for two years, I guess. When you arrived at
Scripps, doing that first summer. How large was
it? Well, it had seven professors. There was just
one student, John Lyman, if I remember rightly.
There were a few other people who were there for
part of the time, but getting their degrees, I
think, at other places. But the seven professors
was really pretty small. It was headed by... a
Norwegian, Harold Sverdip. And Fleming was
there, and Johnson, both of whom collaborated
with Sverdip on the book called The Oceans, which
really didn't take a lot of time, but it was quite a
fundamental contribution to the knowledge of the
ocean. Other people who were there were Zoe Bell, a
bacteriologist, and Chambers, a meteorologist,
McEwen, a physical oceanographer.
I think those are the ones. What was your reaction
to your first time at sea? Did it convince you more
to be an oceanographer? Yes, I guess the first time
at sea was aboard DW Scripps. That ship had just
been bought by Scripps Institution. It was a
schooner. The topmasts were taken off and part of
the bow spread. The mainsail boom was hoisted to
make room for a winch. And the first sailing was
from San Diego to Catalina Island. It was sort of a
show-and-tell cruise. Now I would not expect very
much to come of it, and nothing did. It was taking
several people out. out in the ocean just to
demonstrate the new ship. But I'd had quite a bit of
small boat experience before that with Shepard
taking soundings in the La Jolla Canyons and in
other places. I wasn't seasick.
When did you first meet Roger Revelle? probably
1938, because I went to Scripps as a shepherd the
first time in about the middle of 1937, and Ravel
was in Norway at that time, finishing out a year
after he got his doctor's degree. And I was well
impressed with Roger Ravel, and still as a broad
thinker.
When you're 37, 38, what sort of direction do you
think your career is going to take? What sort of
interest do you think you're going to pursue in
oceanography?
Well, it was clear that it was going to be marine
geology because my basic training was in geology.
And that has to be the case for anyone successful in
oceanography, not to be... not to be divided
completely amongst all the fields, but to
concentrate in one of the fields and know enough
about the other fields in order to operate
successfully in interdisciplinary fields. And
as a matter of fact, a year aboard the sailing ship
was very good in that connection because people on
sailing ships learned to live with the sea instead
of in spite of the sea. In fact, that probably is the
chief reason why many nations have square-rigger
sailing ships as... as training ships for at least
part of their midshipmen to be. And we're living
with the ocean and close to it. You have a better
understanding of the physical oceanography and
the meteorology and the biology and the rest of it.
And that's where we're from.
Did you intend to make an academic career, that is,
teach from the very beginning?
Well, you know, these are questions that I
probably never asked myself. And as a matter of
fact, it had been only a couple years before that I
changed from electrical engineering to mining
engineering to geology to marine geology. So this
means that anything I thought about what I'd do 10
years later wouldn't have much bearing. But at
that time, of course, marine geology wasn't
really a separate science. There were no, there
really was only one course for us on how to talk, and
that was by Shepherd at Illinois.
But it would have been, should have been, would
have been clear to me that there was, at that time,
there was no other avenue for working in that than
being a professor. And as a matter of fact, in 1938,
after I got to know Roger Revelle quite well, he
advised me against going into the field. wisely
enough, because he knew there weren't enough jobs
in it. There weren't at that time. It was only after
World War II that the Navy realized that it had to
know something about the ocean. So basically,
that's what started the trend in increasing size
in marine geology, size of profession. Now, your
first job, though, in 41, is that of teaching
geology, is it not? No, the first job in 1971 was
making electrical earth resistivity surveys
looking for groundwater in Illinois. And I held
that. That was from the time of Dr. June, 71, in
June, 41, to... February of 43. The problem there
was that the Navy really didn't know much about the
ocean at first. And work was being done through
Scripps at what was called the University of
California Division of War Research, which was in
San Diego. Shepard was there. Ravel started
there. Fleming was there. And others whom I knew
well. Johnson was there. And other people from
other places. Well, what happened was that that
the first of the work that was done there was
recognition of the effect of bottom sediments on
the character of anti-submarine sonar searches,
and then later pro-submarine devices,
pro-submarine strategy and tactics, more or
less. Excuse
me. Now, this had come about because Shepard and I
had made a map of the—I'd better say it another
way—Shepard had made maps of the distribution of
bottom sediments on the East Coast while I was
still an undergraduate. And I drew them up into
patterns of bottom sediments. And then later on,
when I was at Scripps with Shepard, then we
together made bottom sediment charts of that
region. It became evident that in acoustic
warfare that acoustic ranges were very large very
long over sand bottom because the sound bounced
from one point of contact in long hops might have a
range of three or four thousand yards whereas over
mud the mud absorbed the sound about like deep
water would and so the ranges were short maybe only
a thousand yards over rock bottoms there's so much
reverberation that the Submarines couldn't
easily be distinguished from rocky bottoms, so at
first there was a great effort bombing rock
outcrops from the bottom. And so when that became
known, then it was desirable to make bottom
sediment charts of the Japan region and finally
the whole Asian region. So that's what we were
doing. Now, what had happened was that Shepard had
started that and then had to make a trip to Hawaii
for another acoustic problem. And so he sent a
telegram to me to Illinois saying, come with or
without permission. So I did the best I could for
that anyway and came out right away then. And then
worked in the field of marine geology for the Navy.
And I take it that's between 43 and 45? That's
right. It ended with the end of the war. It should.
And then in 45, what did you do? Well, I knew that I
wanted to stay in the field of marine geology,
oceanography, so I went to University of Southern
California. And on the visit there, I was given an
offer for joining the department as an assistant
I was just trying to think of the salary there. I
think it was $2,800 a year or something
like that. The first job, the one at the Illinois
Geological Survey, was $2,100, and I thought that
was quite a bit compared to the $300 or $400 that I'd
been earning as a graduate student. Well, is it at
the University of Southern California now? Let me
phrase it this way. What's the next direction that
your career takes in terms of research? Well, soon
after I started teaching at the University of
Southern California, actually about three
months after I got there, I had a phone call from a
geological survey saying that they were given the
responsibility of finding out something about
the radioactivity and the size of the hole that was
going to be made at Bikini in the bomb tests of 1948.
And
so the information, the telegram, was capped in
such a way that it seemed worthwhile to the
University of Southern California to allow me to
go, so they gave me a leave absence for that. It was
about six months.
the head of the department, Thomas Clements, took
over my teaching as well as his own. And then I went
on that. And that, of course, was a good time in
marine geology and oceanography altogether,
because for the first time, the oceanographers
had enough ships. There were a lot of ships at
Bikini. They weren't operating very well,
mostly, for part of the time. In fact, I had two
minesweepers to take samples and soundings in the
lagoons of Bikini and Inuitok, Ronzalap and
Rongarik, four atolls there, two were controls,
Ronzalap, Rongarik. Bikini was the bomb test
area, and Inuitok was downwind, and that made it a
safety problem. So with the number of ships that
were available, then oceanographers in all
fields were able to do a lot of work in the Marshall
Islands more intensely than they'd ever been able
to do anyplace before. So this was a turning point
for many people in oceanography. It was for me, I'd
say. So I was quite happy continuing then in the
oceanography, using teaching as a mechanism.
Next, there was a call from the Navy. from the
Geological Survey also for the Persian Gulf. The
Navy had wanted to set up a hydrographic office.
Hydrography before had been the matter of writing
soundings on charts. They didn't really have any
oceanography, so they'd made noise about wanting
to do oceanography, so the Navy gave them the job.
of doing oceanography in the Persian Gulf, and
they weren't ready. So they asked me to take charge
of it. I brought two students with me, one of whom,
Robert Dill, is still in the business. He's
director of Virgin Islands Laboratory. And so we
made a rather thorough study in the short time
available. It was only two weeks of ship time in
August of 1948. So that, of course, was it. a
different kind of marine geology, but one like
Bikini that could make ties between biological
oceanography and physical oceanography with the
marine geology. And then, did you go out to the
Persian Gulf? Yeah, during the summer times it
didn't interfere with the teaching. And what new
interest in oceanography in terms of, what
direction is your career taking? Well, it was
clear from Bikini and the Persian Gulf that there
was a lot of interest in sedimentation, because
geologists really hadn't—marine geologists
really hadn't done very much in marine sediments
after the Challenger expedition. In fact, as far
as I know, I was the first one to make any systematic
measurements of water content along the length of
cores, as simple as that, for example. And then
the close connection with the biology means that
the
organisms, both plants and animals that have
calcareous skeletons, were directly associated
with the sediments that they produced in both
Bikini and the Persian Gulf. At the same time, of
course, I was interested in those. I continued
some work off Southern California, which was
really a continuation of the kind of work that I've
done as a doctor's dissertation with Shepard,
working with basin sediments. And there, the
organic matter was the main connection with the
marine
geology sediments. And what did your work with
sediments demonstrate?
from the viewpoint of modern sedimentologists,
it demonstrated that there isn't much point in
making general grain size measurements where
grain size is a function of contribution by
biological materials and not a function of
distance or transportation. But more important
than that, I got interested in the
biogeochemistry, where we could trace the depth
decrease of organic matter in the sediments. And
that, of course, meant that we had to know
something about the distribution of carbon and
nitrogen in the sediments. It became clear that
only part of the nitrogen was present as organic
matter. So we tried various things. At the
University of Southern California, there was a
man named Rittenberg, Sidney Rittenberg, who had
been at... at Scripps as a bacteriologist, and I
had several projects, one of which funded a
chemist getting his doctorate degree there. So
that meant that we could make close ties between
geology, biology, and bacteriology. That meant
that we could take a stratigraphic approach to the
distribution of organic matter and see what
happened over the space of time as the sediments
accumulated at a very slow rate. We found, for
example, we did, among other things, the depth
distribution of amino acids This showed that only
about a fifth of the total nitrogen was in amino
acids, so where is the rest? We also then worked on
amino sugars and on ordinary sugars and
carbohydrates and depth distribution of
petroleum compounds or compounds that are
closely related to petroleum, ones who are
classified as naphthenes and aromatics and so
forth. and worked on gases in the sediments, their
origins and so forth. But in the techniques, I
think we worked at that time pretty well, pretty
thoroughly with the techniques that were
available, techniques up to about 1960. And in
1960, I put together a book called The Sea Off
Southern California to summarize what had been
done there in the sediments. And I had in mind
making a change because I thought we were at the
point of diminishing returns for the techniques
then available for application to the marine
sediments. And after writing the book, I went to
work on the Dead Sea just to learn how salt was
deposited. That also was to enable me to keep my
sticky fingers off the manuscript for all the
books being printed. And then when I came back, I
stayed another year and decided to change oceans
and fields and came to Woods Hole. changed oceans,
and then changed entirely from sediments, almost
entirely from sediments to geophysics. Okay, and
your geophysics work. What were the first things
you began to experiment with in geophysics? Well,
what happened at that time was that the, after I'd
taken the job at Woods Hole, the geological survey
asked me to start a program for them on the on marine
geology. I talked a lot before with the geological
survey in previous years, previous directors,
but they were always afraid of the high cost simply
because one day of ship time would pay for maybe the
whole summer for one geologist out in the field,
field expenses. So they're slow at coming in.
I told them that I'd accepted the job at Woods Hole
and couldn't do that. Suggested that they pay for
the They provide the funds for me to do the work I
wanted to do on the coast and send six of their
people then to be trained in marine geology and
later to make their own way. So this then resulted
in year-to-year work for about six or seven years
for the study of the Atlantic continental shelf
and slope, mainly the shelf. And at the end of six or
seven years, The people then had learned how to do
the work and wanted to make their own image, and now
they have a separate organization, which is
pretty large, about 90 people, I think, because
the direction of the federal funds is going for
energy.
When we came to the coast, the major thing to do was
to learn something about the sediments on the
surface. the rocks of the shelf, the structure of
the rocks at depth, and then other things like the
relationships of the biology to the sediments and
the effect of the shelf and slope on the currents.
So this was a probe, multiple-faceted probe, into
general oceanography.
most obvious way to learn about the rocks at depth
was to do seismic reflection continuous seismic
reflection profiling the woods hold had a lot of
experience in that before so had lamont head
experience the but they were busy with other
things so this method we could take a fundamental
look at the problem of seismic work and start a new a
new approach, not necessarily following the ways
that had been done traditionally. So the first
thing we did then was to look into the problems of
seismic reflection, where basically there are
several. One is the source, sound source. Another
is the sound detection, reflection, to detect the
echoes reflected back from the inner layers
within the bottom. Neither is the processing of
that sound. Neither is the recording of it. We
started with the recording, I guess, because...